The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is future histories.
We need to define what we mean by future history because almost by definition any science fiction
story deals with the future. And you know you could call it a future history simply because
that's where it takes place, but as a descriptive term, as a particular concept, future history
is something else. And I think there are certain criteria that have to be necessary for a future
history story. And I think one of them would have to be a long time span. I think you have
to have an author who's working over a period of centuries or even millennia for a true
future history. You can't simply have two or three books that occur in a short period
of time.
Right. And one obvious thing would be that there would be more than one story concerning
a certain background that an author has contrived.
Well, it would have to be a series, more than one story obviously. There would have to be
a series, some kind of progression or development or evolution to the stories. I don't think
it's enough that you have a story or novels on one character. I think you have to have
change over a long period of time and those changes have to be connected in an evolutionary
way, in a progressive way.
Yeah. So stories need to build toward a future which derives itself logically from the progressions
in the stories.
Right. Like if one story or one novel posits a new kind of technological innovation or
a...
Then that innovation will show up in following stories.
Yeah. He would have to show the results of it sometime in the future, say a new space
drive or a new social structure. He would have to follow that through with the implications
of it, the results of it in the future.
This tends to be something that is enjoyable for the reader as well because he can go back
and relate to developments, inventions, or social orders that he knows about from previous
stories and has a sense of involvement that way that is unique to future histories.
I think there have been many authors who have attempted a future history, maybe not consciously,
but any time an author I think writes more than one book with a certain character or
follows through on a concept or idea. He's got the beginnings of a future history.
Isaac Asimov I think in his foundation series had the makings of a future history. Of course
that's a trilogy, the three books in the series, but he did follow through with concepts. It
goes over hundreds of years in its time span. So that would have to qualify as a future
series, but it's not as extensive I think as other authors.
As true. Ursula K. Le Guin has done the same thing in her writing where she has communications
equipment which is common in all the novels and her methods of space travel are common
between all of her novels.
I don't think she has many connections. She just mentions things, but if I recall she
doesn't actually follow through with integral relationships between her books.
Not specifically, no.
And tonight I think we will be concentrating mostly on the works of three authors who seem
to have created a series that are more comprehensive or longer, who have created series that are
seemingly more comprehensive than some of the others perhaps. The authors are Robert
Heinlein in his future history, the past through tomorrow, Paul Anderson's future history series,
and also the works of Larry Niven.
The original, the first, and probably one of the most influential of all writers who
has done a future history, was not technically a science fiction author as such. He was a
British philosopher named Olaf Stapledon. He died in 1950. His works are not really
true novels or philosophical meditations on the future of man, but his influence has
been tremendous. His best known work is entitled Last and First Men, published in 1930. And
his future history takes in about two billion years from the present to about two billion
years in the future. It covers the rise and fall of civilizations. It goes through evolutionary
changes in man. I think he goes through 17 changes, the first men, second men, third men,
and so forth. His last race of men are called the 18th men. And at the end of last and first
men, they're at the edge of extinction. The human race is almost extinct. They're on
Neptune. It's kind of interesting that in two billion years they've only gotten to Neptune.
But at the end of that book, they're spraying artificial human spores into space with the
hope that solar radiation will carry them to other parts of the galaxy. But he made
charts, huge charts, and was mostly interested in his philosophy, where man was going, what
man was like, defining the species as a whole and so forth. And his influence was very great
on pure science fiction writers.
In Robert Heinlein's future history, many of the activities take place on the Earth
and then move out into our solar system. And not really beyond until much later in his
series. One of his first books, our short stories, was The Roads Must Roll.
This story presents us with a rather unique invention, I think, a new type of transportation
system that's, as far as I know, not been used in other stories. It's a series of conveyor
belts, if you will, extremely large, expansive conveyor belts that run at varying speeds right
next to one another so that a person could step onto the first level at, say, five miles
per hour and keep advancing to the next belt over until he's traveling 90 or 100 miles
an hour. These things stretch over what we would consider our highway system now, to
go all across the country and, I assume, the world. And the story is a commentary on the
way the system works and the way it's become so expansive that it is no longer efficient
and the way that the people are reacting to this fact. The strikers try to destroy the
system and the men who are in charge of it, of course, try to protect it.
Even though there's a strike and even though the roads aren't operating as efficiently
as they should, I think it's a good example of extrapolation, science fiction extrapolation.
This was written in the early 40s. And I think it's a pretty good guess by Heinlein, or pretty
good look into the future, seeing the gasoline crisis, perhaps, seeing the proliferation
of cars, the difficulty of transportation. Back in those days, it would seem to me fairly
logical that someone could foresee mechanized roads. And in that sense, you know, thinking
of the future, projecting or extrapolating what might come about, he was wrong. But on
the other hand, back then, that was a pretty good guess, I would say.
Another early story in his future history series, the earliest of all published in 1941,
was called Lifeline. And it's sort of a gimmick story. An inventor named Pinaro, Dr. Pinaro,
who turns up very briefly in some other works, has invented a machine that can tell exactly
when a person will die. Of course, the insurance companies don't appreciate this. And after
a long series of hassles and chases and arguments, they succeed in having him assassinated, which
was no surprise to him because he predicted his own death down to the minute, too. But
very soon, Heinlein got into the, I think he was encouraged by his editor in this future
history series.
John W. Campbell, Heinlein's editor, after printing a few of Heinlein's books, discovered
his future history charts and published those, and encouraged Heinlein to fell out those charts
with stories that Campbell would publish later on in astounding science fiction and other
magazines. After Heinlein wrote the Rosemus Role, he wrote Blow-Ups Happen, which is concerned
with atomic energy and its generation on the earth. His next series of books dealt with
getting man to the moon and what man did on the moon.
I think the majority of his future history dealt with moon exploration and the beginnings
of exploration of the solar system. The man who sold the moon is one of his better known
works, and I think one of the most fascinating of his novels. And basically, Heinlein thought
that moon exploration or outer space exploration would be financed by private industry. Now,
he was wrong there, but the book concerns the exploits of one man, a man named Harriman,
D.D. Harriman. He has an obsession to go to the moon to explore the solar system. He
happens to be a billionaire, of course, so he can indulge his obsession. And he does
everything he can to sell the moon from having the spaceship built by his companies to publicizing
it to advertising it, to getting the people worked up for it. There is some humor in the
work, there's some satire, I remember for instance, in trying to get backing or advertising
for the moon, money, get the people behind it. He talked to one soft drink company whose
product was named Moch into projecting, or at least he thought they could, project the
symbol of their product on the moon from the earth. In other words, people would look at
the moon and see the symbol of a soft drink. And in doing this, of course, he was trying
to sell the moon to get the people behind it. The end of the work, he succeeded through
all sorts of chicanery, through exploitation, through pushing, through the force of his
personality. He's got people on the moon, and he's been successful, although he himself
can never go, because by this time he's an old man. Or at least at this point in time,
Heine led you to believe that he won't ever go. He did try later, I think, didn't he?
In a book, or excuse me, a short story called Requiem, Herrerman finally does reach the
moon, and he dies while he's embarking from the spaceship on the moon, and he finally
reaches the moon's surface, but he dies there. And we get the idea that he knew he was going
to die, but to him it was worth it. In fact, he had to, as rich as he was, as famous as
he was, he had to do it secretly. He had to bribe two pilots to take him, he had to get
the spaceship set up secretly. And I'm sure he knew it was going to be his last flight,
but this is what he wanted, and he succeeded.
In a collection of short stories called The Green Hills of Earth, Highland explores many
aspects of the colonization of our solar system.
He does that in many ways. He covers questions such as women's liberation with Delilah in
the Space Rigor, the first woman to work on a space station. Of course, she has trouble
at first, but the men finally accept her.
Another story, the title story, The Green Hills of Earth, concerned a blind bard or a singer
poet of the spaceways, who's, he is blind, the men take him on their ship simply because
he used to be a spaceman, and has saved, in fact, saved a whole ship full of people. But
now he's a poet, a singer, even though he's blind. And it's more of a human interest story,
which Highland does emphasize a great deal in his future history.
The point at which he left colonization of the solar system and exploration of the moon,
I think, was in one of his better known novels entitled Methuselah's Children.
The way he did it is interesting. There was a family or a group of people who, through
mutation alone, became almost immortal. Their lifespans were at least three or four times
out of normal humans, and some of them even longer. And one of his family was entitled,
his name was Lazarus Long, who turns up in a lot of Highland stories, one of his more
famous characters. But Highland does this very well in showing the, the reaction of,
the family has to hide their secret, the fact that they're almost immortal. But the reaction
of society is sharp when they find out the existence of these people. They think that
the family is keeping a secret of longevity from them, which they're not. So the family's
in great danger. And they finally commandeer or hijack an experimental interstellar craft.
It's going to be the first one to leave the solar system. They hijack it. They take off
for the stars. And after many adventures and meeting a couple of alien races, they do come
back to Earth. And in the meantime, the rest of humanity, because of the time difference,
has discovered ways of increasing their own life spans. So the time, the problem there's
been taken care of. Highland did continue with this and is one of his last works, 1973,
the time enough for love. He has a character of Lazarus Long again in that work, but it's
very loosely connected to the rest of his story. Just the connection is not very sharp.
Paul Anderson's future history is quite a bit more expansive than Highland's. Highland's
covered about 625 years. Anderson's covers a few thousand years. He starts in the 21st
century. And after the human beings have discovered a way of traveling faster than light, they
have an interstellar drive. And human society breaks up into many, many different colonies
throughout the galaxy, different planets, different areas with very little communication
between them. Sort of a far flung breakup is what it's called. And this portion of his
future history is called the Polysotectic League. And probably the dominating character
of that, the stories involving the league is Nicholas Van Rijn.
One of the main elements that Paul Anderson has foreseen here is that the Polysotectic
League and all of humanity as it stretches out through the stars would be a trading
empire, more like a frontier.
Vegley Rumanison of the East India Company and whatnot that went on around the 17th and
18th century.
Right. And he introduces characters who are taking advantage of this aspect, principally
the novel of the Polysotectic League or his future history series called Tragedor to the
Stars.
In the first story of Tragedor to the Stars, hiding place, we're introduced to Nicholas,
who is on board of a yacht. And he and his crew are trying to escape from some human enemies.
The yacht is defective and they know that they can't get away from these humans. So
they drop out of their hyperdrive, which is shuttling them along higher than the speed
of light into normal space and search for an alien ship, which they believe they might
be lucky enough to find circling a particular star. They don't know anything about these
aliens and all they want is just a ship that they can get a hold of to go on to their base.
When they do drop out of light speed, they find a ship and they try to board it. When
they get there and force their way on board, the aliens have disappeared and they've taken
everything out of their control room that might indicate what size or shape they are.
When they look into the hold of the ship, they find what is essentially an interstellar
zoo. It's apparently a ship that the aliens have been using to transport alien creatures
to different places in their solar system. And they have apparently taken one of the
empty cages themselves and have hidden there so that the humans don't know which ones
they are. The entire thing centers around Nicholas trying to outsmart the aliens and
find out who they are in time for them to get the ship working and get out of there
before the human enemies catch up with them. It's a typical Van Rijn story because everyone
else by the end of the story has given up hope of ever getting away. And only Nicholas
is calm enough and cool enough in his own mind to make it work.
And clever enough too, I think a man like Nicholas has to, well he operates on his wits.
He's not the heroic type. He does things because of his quick-wittedness, his cleverness. And
I think there's a certain logic to his motivation too. When you think of it, the trading empire,
the profit motive that Nicholas Van Rijn is involved with, with such a huge number of
colonies with worlds scattered over the entire galaxy, it's not practical for any one world
to try to dominate to a form of government. This polysotectonic league was really not
a government, it was more of a trading empire.
Another similar story to this is the War of the Wingmen, which was reissued I think
under the name the man who counts. Again, it's a Nicholas Van Rijn story. He changes
all the rules because in the end he's the one that gets the rewards, the girl, and arranges
the escape from their marooned situation on this alien planet.
The planet itself gives Anderson an excuse to exercise his talents at world building.
The planet is set 90 degrees off center on its axis, thus giving extreme changes in seasons
from year to year. The planet is twice the diameter of the earth and five times its mass,
but the densest material it's made up of is calcium and lighter materials, thus giving
it a gravity only slightly greater than the earth. The atmosphere is much deeper and thicker
than on the earth and is able to support a humanoid flying mammal.
These creatures are the intelligent life of the planet and are the focus of the manipulations
of Nicholas Van Rijn. His sole object is to get himself and his party off the planet
in one piece and he really doesn't care how far he has to go lying, stealing, cheating,
whatever to get that end accomplished. He manages to go through quite a few different manipulations
in this process, but showing his characteristic crabbiness and his characteristic cleverness
at the same time, he manages to make this come off.
As you pointed out earlier at the end of the book, the whole space opera motif has been
changed and Nicholas Van Rijn, who is very unheroic, has succeeded in saving his companions,
one of whom is a beautiful woman, and really performing actions which you would only expect
a great hero to be able to perform, but Van Rijn does it simply with his cleverness,
his apparent selfishness, but really his actions seem to benefit everybody.
The net effect is one of both humor and great enjoyment.
There was one other major division in Anderson's future history. The polysotectonic league
lasted for millennia, but it did fall finally. After a period called the Time of Troubles,
the Terran Empire took over most of the galaxy. Probably his character as well known as Nicholas
Van Rijn takes up most of these stories, Dominic Flandry.
With Flandry, Anderson has the opportunity to grow up with a character. We see him first
of all when he's a young, innocent space cadet just entering the service of the Terran Empire.
We see him grow, we see him become an agent, a diplomat, a very important force in this
Terran Empire. He is different than Van Rijn. He's sophisticated, he's smooth, he's a
good guy. He does operate by his wits, but he's more of a hero type in that he can fight,
he can perform heroic actions. But he does it with sort of a James Bond-ish cynicism
or a James Bond-ish kind of flair, panache about him.
But I think there are a number of novels and stories about Dominic Flandry following his
whole lifespan until almost the fall of the Terran Empire, which would end Anderson's
future history series. There's one story, I believe, which goes beyond the Terran Empire,
which suggests that things are coming back together after its fall. But the Terrans or
the Earthlings did have one major enemy, the Merseans, in this section of Anderson's future
history. And Flandry's job for most of the stories and novels built around him was to
combat the Mersean threat.
The third author we're considering under the future history framework is Larry Niven.
Niven is probably one of the most popular of the present day science fiction writers.
He's young, he's bright, he loves to write, very personable, and he's constructed a tightly
connected future history series and attracted a great many fans in doing so.
Well, many of these fans are quite involved in the works themselves. They've worked out
elaborate charts and timelines and have written Niven and given him all sorts of feedback
on the works that he's written. In fact, this has become rather complex and can be a problem,
I guess, to some future history writers in that you better have everything just right
or some preacher's going to pick out an error and show it to you. Some of the errors that,
for instance, that were involved in the novel Ringworld that was so popular about ten years
ago were mentioned to him by fans and he worked them out in the sequel and explained them
away, which must have been quite a challenge for him to do.
In fact, if I recall, he had said in one of his volumes that he wasn't going to write
any more in his future history. I forget which volume he said that in, but later he
did write Ringworld Engineers and I suspect it was because of his fans, the pressure on
him to continue with the timeline that he'd started.
Yes, he said that he had no intention of completing that story but went on ahead because of the
reaction to the story, so popular.
Niven's future history starts off on our present and works its way forward to the year 3100,
starting off with the beginnings of an organ bank where people, in the beginning, when
they die, leave organs to be implanted in other people and that later grows into a system
where people many times unwillingly end up donating organs to this organ bank and it
also has the first manned explorations of our solar system.
He also brings in the dolphins and the whales, I believe, as an intelligent race and gives
equal rights to those creatures. The organ bank thing becomes rather more expansive within
the next hundred years or so as everyone wants to live as long as they can. They begin to
pass laws saying any minor infractions that you might commit automatically entail the
death penalty so that your body parts can be used for other people.
Early colonization of our surrounding star systems was done by a ship called Abusard
Ramjet, which because of its extremely intense magnetic field, no human occupant could travel
in the ship, therefore they were sent out as sort of robot probes. Later on they developed
a system which by they could shield the ship and human occupants could go along with them.
But he made some very interesting stories surrounding these early colonization ships
where the robot-controlled Abusard Ramjet would go out and scout out a planet and land
on it and say this planet is suitable for human habitation and then would radio the
slow boats which were following it at sublight speed to come to this location and this would
make a good place for a settlement. All the colonists on board the slow boats were
sent suspended animation and did not know exactly where they were heading. They depended
upon the accuracy of the robot probe which made for some very interesting planets which
ended up being colonized by humankind. One of them was called Mount Look at That and
it got its name by the ram robot came down and landed in a particular area. It tested
all the gases and everything and found out this place was perfectly habitable for human
beings and radioed the slow boat and they followed it to its location and then the computer
aboard the slow boat woke up the crew and they went down to land on the surface of the
planet and they were aghast to find out that the surface was made of pure methane, totally
uninhabitable and they were flying along the rim of the atmosphere and finally they
see this plateau reaching 40 miles straight up from the surface of the planet being about
the size of California and when the pilot sees it he goes, well dang, look at that.
There go the name of the planet.
I think one of his novels dealt with the society on that planet, the gift from earth I believe.
True that was a gift from earth is the end of the organ banks per se because the end
developments in a gift from earth they learned to clone various organs where if somebody
needed to deliver they would simply clone and grow a liver.
In introducing the novel Ringworld, one of his most popular books, we need to go back
to about the year 2500 when humanity meets another alien race known as the Pearson's
puppeteers. This is a very strange race who are very technical and very advanced but seemingly
socially different from us in that they are extremely cowardly. All of their activities
are regulated by this cowardice. They want to protect themselves to the point where they
do anything including build a high technological society to do so. This novel won both Hugo
and Nebula awards for Larry Niven.
The Ringworld is an extrapolation on a Diason sphere which is a, if you can imagine a hollow
sphere built around a sun and then set spinning so that you can have gravity on the inside.
The Ringworld is simply a ring built around a sun with mountains on the edge of the ring
at least a thousand miles high in order to keep the atmosphere inside it. Set the ring
rotating in order to create gravity on the inside and there you've got a habitat with
approximately three trillion times the surface area of the earth.
I think there would be a major theme to all three of these authors that we've covered on
the show and their future history concept. First of all any author who constructs a
future history I think is optimistic about man's future. You know man has a future therefore
he's going to write about it. And I see in all of them the expansion of man, the idea
that man is going to be unstoppable. He will progress. He may fall many times but he will
still keep going. So overall I would say that each author treats the rise and fall of human
civilization in the future. You know the high points and the low points but man still keeps
going. I think that's very strong in Heinlein and also in Anderson and Niven.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane and David Carson. This has been the Science Fiction Radio
Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCVFM
and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.